Visual Music Player – Final Prototype - Artist's Statement
By Matthew Salaciak 29644490
For Rilla Khaled – CART 353

The computer’s place within a music studio has been the subject of countless arguments. Putting aside its most fitting use as a digital recording interface, computers have now become a central musical instrument within studios. It is strange to think of it as a musical instrument because it doesn’t embody just one type of instrument, it has the ability to emulate a myriad of instruments. This polymorphic ability is incredible. It allows artists the ability to use any type of instrument at extreme convenience, but with this convenience comes a trade off, its interface. As a musician, limitations and interactions are extremely important in the creation process of song writing. It is too easy to be side tracked by having a wide variety of sounds, instruments and equipment interfaces to explore. When using a computer as an instrument, it is almost impossible not to be side tracked.

One instrument in particular I want to focus on is the Sampler. Most software versions of samplers are almost exact virtual copies of their hardware counterparts. It has all the advantages of functionality but one big disadvantage, its interface. These software emulations always recreate the hardware versions interface, but really its just using the computer as an interface. I find this extremely problematic, since one of the most important aspects of hardware samplers is its interface. The Sampler as an instrument has the ability to create entire tracks just based off interaction, an example of this is early hip-hop, house music and mid 80s synthpop. This issue is what led me to research and create my program, Visual Music Player. I wanted to create a computer based sample player that had its own unique interface, as well as being true to a typical interaction with a computer, which is visual dependent.
Visual Music Player is a simple and limited sample player that plays samples on a 16 bar loop. The main focus of the Visual Music Player is not the complexity of the Sampler but its interface, which is directly related to the computers interface, using the mouse, keyboard and screen. Each sample is represented by a square object that has color and the ability to move. Each color represents a group of samples. For example, Black squares indicate hard drum samples, where green samples indicate lighter drum samples. Each group’s color has different shades stemming from their group color to represent that each square within the group is a unique sample. 

The interaction now is created by watching these colorful squares float around the screen endlessly, waiting to be clicked. Clicking the square will trigger the sample that the square represents. It stops moving and begins to start animating to the beat. When done with this sample, touching it with your mouse and clicking any key on the keyboard will mute it, and put it back in motion indicating it is ready for another interaction. If you happy with the music being made, you can record it. There is also a delay and flanger effect mix sliders to add extra movement if required. In order to convey the idea of time, or in our case motion along the 16 steps, I implemented a line that steps sequentially down the screen. I thought it was important to include something linear that is usually the basis of music creation, so the user has an idea of where the beat begins and ends. Although being linear is what I intended, I decided to make this line an oscilloscope. I wanted to communicate the continuous motion that is music, which is also represented by the continuous motion of these square shapes.
To Implement this in code I used the Minim Library to design the Sampler and implement the effects and record functions that were added. I used controlP5 to implement the user interface for the record button and effects sliders. The rest was developed within processing using their built in functions such as PVectors. Principles of java - Object oriented programing and ArrayLists were used in order to keep the code lean and functional. 

The process of bringing this project together created two main research insights, one is interaction design and the other creative coding. As I moved through iterations of this project, I had to question and think about what I value as an interface in hardware instruments, and what I value as an interface with anything digital/computational. To find a way to represent an instrument outside of this traditional idea of an instrument and within a computer interface was interesting but also unfulfilling. I felt like I barely touched the surface of how we can create hybrid computer instruments based solely on how we think of interfaces. This led me to my other insight, creative coding. There is already a plethora of creative digital instruments and creative computer generated visuals installations, but I feel there is need for a link between the two. Instead of pushing functionality of what we want from an instrument, or what we want to experience visual in an installation, I want to continue to use code creativity to further the link between the two. This is one of my first attempts to use code as a creative output, coupling it with my other output being music, I feel the need to keep exploring these insights more.
